 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY                    
(MINISTRY OF POWER)  
Sewa Bhawan (North Wing), Room No. 62 2, 6th Floor,  
R. K. Puram, New Delhi -110066  
Tel. Fax -011-26103246 , email: celegal -cea@gov.in  
 Website:  www.cea.nic.in  
 
PUBLIC  NOTICE  
 
    In accordance with the Section 177 of the Electricity Act, 2003, 
the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) , proposes  to notify  the draft  
Central Electricity Authority (Flexible operation of thermal power 
plants) Regulations, 2022 .  The proposed draft regulations  are available 
on the CEA Website www.cea.nic.in  for inviting public comments . The 
Regulations can also be inspected in the office of Chief Engineer  (Legal) , 
Sewa Bhawan (North Wing), Room No. 622, 6t h Floor, R. K. Puram, New 
Delhi -110066 on any working day till 26th August , 2022 between 1100 
hrs to 1600 hr s.   
 
2.          All the Stakeholders including the public are requested to send 
their comments on the draft regulations to Chief Engineer (Legal),  Sewa 
Bhawan (North Wing), Room No. 622, 6th Floor, R. K. Puram, New 
Delhi -110066  by post or through e -mail (celegal -cea@gov.in ) latest by  
26th August , 2022 . 
 
 
(Rakesh Goyal  ) 
Secretary, CEA  
 
 

[To be published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, in Part III, Section 4]
Government of India
Ministry of Power
Central Electricity Authority
New Delhi,                        , 2022
NOTIFICATION
File  No.  CEA-TH-17-13/4/2022-TETD  Division  -  In  exercise  of  the  powers
conferred by sub-section (2)(g) of Section 177 of the Electricity Act 2003, the
Central Electricity Authority hereby makes the following Regulations namely:
1.Short Title and Commencement- (1)These Regulations may be called
the  Central  Electricity  Authority  ( Flexible  operation  of  thermal  power  plants)
Regulations, 2022.
(2)They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official
Gazette.
2.Definitions- (1)In  these  Regulations,  unless  the  context  otherwise
requires, 
(a)“Act” means the Electricity Act, 2003;
(b)“Authority” means the Central Electricity Authority established under sub-
section (2) of Section 70 of the Act;
(c) “Base  load  operation”  means  operation  at  maximum  continuous  rating
(MCR) or its high fraction;
(d)“Boiler Maximum Continuous Rating (BMCR)” means the maximum steam
output,  the  steam  generator  (boiler)  can  deliver  continuously  at  rated
parameters;
(e)“Cold start”, in relation to steam turbine, means start up after a shut down
period exceeding 72 hours (turbine metal temperatures below approximately
40% of their full load values);
(f)“Control load”, in relation to coal or lignite based thermal generating units,
means  the  lowest  load  at  which  the  rated  steam  temperature  can  be
maintained under auto control system;
(g)“Flexible operation” means the ability  of thermal plant to adjust the net
power fed into the grid as per the dispatch schedules where must run power
plants like renewable energy sources are taking part in meeting grid load
demand.80351/2022/Legal4

(h)“Hot start”, in relation to steam turbine, means start up after a shut down
period of less than 10 hours (turbine metal temperatures approximately 80%
of their full load values);
(i)“Maximum Continuous Rating (MCR)”,-in relation to coal or lignite based
thermal  generating  units,  means  maximum  continuous  output  at  the
generator terminals expressed in kilo volt ampere (kVA)  (net of any external
excitation  power)  as  guaranteed  by  the  manufacturer  at  the  rated
parameters; 
(j)“Minimum Power Levels (MPL)” means the minimum output power at the
generator terminals that the power plant can sustain continuously without oil
support. It is expressed as percentage of maximum rated capacity. 
(k)“Must run” status for a power plant means generation of power from such
power plant should not be curtailed for factors other than on account of grid
safety or safety of equipment or personnel.
(l)“Ramp rate” means the measurement of how quickly a power plant can
change its output. It is calculated as the ratio of change in power output to
time taken for such change in power output. It is expressed as percentage
(of unit rating) per minute. 
(m)“Retrofit”  means  modernization  or  upgradation  of  power  plant
components or subsystems.
(n)“Shut down” means total stoppage of power plant and production activities
by cutting off in- coming power supply to the power plant.
(o)“Startup  /  shutdown  time”,  in  relation  to  power  plants  means  the  time
required  to  move  from  nonoperational  state  (cold,  warm,  hot  state)  to
operational state and vice versa. It is expressed in minutes.
(p)“Sub-Critical Unit”, in relation to coal or lignite based thermal generating unit,
means  a  unit  designed  for  main  steam  pressure  less  than  the  critical
pressure (225.56 kg/ cm2) of water;
(q)“Super-Critical Unit”, in relation to coal or lignite based thermal generating
unit, means a unit designed for main steam pressure more than the critical
pressure (225.56 kg/cm2) of water;
(r)“Thermal Power Plants (TPP) ”  means the ‘generating station’ as defined in
the Act  for generating electricity using fossil fuels such as coal, lignite, gas,
liquid  fuel  or  combination  of  these  as  its  primary  source  of  energy  to
generate electric power;
(s)“Ultra  Super-Critical  Unit”,  in  relation  to  coal  or  lignite  based  thermal
generating  unit  means  a  supercritical  unit  with  steam  temperature  of
600/6000C or higher at turbine inlet;80351/2022/Legal5

(t)“Unit”,  in  relation  to  a  coal  or  lignite  based  thermal  generating  station,
means steam generator with interconnected steam turbine-generator and
auxiliaries, operated as one single set or system to generate electric power;
(u)“Warm start”, in relation to steam turbine, means start up after a shut down
period between 10 hours and 72 hours (turbine metal temperatures between
approximately 40% and 80% of their full load values ).
(2)words and expressions used but not defined in these Regulations shall
have the meaning assigned to them in the Act.
3.Applicability - These Regulations shall apply to all coal and lignite based
thermal power plants and load despatch centers.
4.General Requirements  - (1)   The Thermal Power Plants shall be suitably 
designed for full range of ambient and other environmental conditions 
prevailing at site. 
(2)The various parts or components or assemblies of equipment and
systems shall be of proven materials with established physical and chemical
properties appropriate to the service as intended.
(3)All equipment and systems installed shall comply with the provisions
of statutes, Regulations and safety codes, as applicable.
(4)(1)  The  Thermal  Power  Plants  shall  be  designed  to  comply  with
requirements stipulated in
(a)Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards for Connectivity
to the Grid) Regulations, 2007 as amended time to time;
(b)Indian  Electricity  Grid  Code  issued  by  Central  Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC);
(c)Applicable  State  Grid  Code  issued  by  appropriate  Regulatory
Commission;
(d)Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards for Construction
of  Electrical  Plants  and  Electric  Lines)  Regulations,  2010  as
amended time to time;
(e)Central  Electricity  Authority.  (Measures  relating  to  Safety  and
Electricity Supply), Regulations, 2010 as amended time to time;
(f)Central  Electricity  Authority  (Safety  Requirements  for
Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Electrical Plants and
Electric Lines) Regulations, 2011 and;
(g)Central Electricity Authority (Grid Standards) Regulations, 2010.
(2) The conditions stipulated in these Regulations shall prevail upon in
case of contradictions. 
5.The flexible operation of a  power plant shall refer to the characteristics
indicated in Fig. 1.80351/2022/Legal6

Fig 1: Characteristcs  o Flexibility
6.Suitability of units for flexible operation: 
i.The  units  throughout  their  service  life  shall  be  considered  for  flexible
operation.
ii.The suitability of units for start/stops and deep load following (Ramps) shall
be assessed beforehand.
iii.The condition assessment of existing plant systems and its upgradation, if
required, to accommodate operating requirements arising out of flexible
operation shall be addressed beforehand.
7. Flexible Operation of the Thermal Power Plants (TPP): 
i.All TPPs shall be capable of providing the required output as per the
schedule for generation finalized by appropriate Load Despatch Centers.
Based on the availability of must run stations, plants or units shall follow
the variable load requirements.
ii.The appropriate Load Despatch Centers shall schedule all coal based
thermal power plants, upto the MPL of 55%, to support the operation of
must run stations.
iii.The appropriate Load Despatch Centers may schedule all coal based
thermal power plants, upto the MPL of 40%, to support the operation of
must run stations, subject to the provisions mentioned at Sub-clause (v)
of this Clause.
iv.       The minimum rate of loading or unloading for coal based thermal power
plants shall be 3% per minute above the MPL.
Provided that for supercritical and ultra-super-critical units, minimum rate
of loading or unloading shall be 5% per minute above the MPL.
v.The thermal power plants shall implement the necessary modifications, if
any, to achieve the requirements as specified in Sub-Clause (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of this Clause to generate flexible power according to schedules
finalized by appropriate LDCs.80351/2022/Legal7

Provided  that  the  implementation  of  Sub-Clause  (iii)  and  (iv)  of  this
Clause would be completed by all thermal power units within three years
from the date of notification of these Regulations, subject to the technical
feasibility studies to be done in consultation with concerned OEMs or
qualified  consultants  with  regard  to  the  requirements  mentioned  at
Clause 6 and Clause 8 of these regulations.
Provided  further  that  the  implementation  of  Sub-Clause  (ii)  shall  be
implemented by all thermal power units within one year of the notification
of these Regulations.
8.Process for implementing Flexible Operation of the Thermal Power Plants:
Measures to lower minimum limits of power output, increase the ramp
rates  and  optimize  the  start-up  of  the  power  plants  should  be
implemented based on technical feasibility studies involving assessment
of  the  following  factors  in  consultation  with  the  concerned  Original
Equipment Manufacturers/ Qualified Consultants: 
a.Rated Capacity
b.Minimum load Design rating with no oil support 
c.Design Ramp rate. 
d.Influence of low load operation on components and  systems.
e.Technical boundary conditions for flexible operation
f.Combustion  system  optimization,  co-ordination  of  mill  and
burner systems.
TPPs may decide adoption of suitable modifications in consultation
with concerned OEMs/ qualified consultants.
9.Any deviation from the limits prescribed under these Regulations shall be
brought before the Authority on case to case basis by the thermal power plants for
exemption, if any.
************80351/2022/Legal8