







 
1 
 Draft Guidelines for implementation of PM -Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana  Central Financial 
Assistance Component  
 
1) Background  
 
a) The Government of India has approved the PM Surya Ghar : Muft Bijli Yojana on 29th February,  
2024 to increase the share of solar rooftop capacity and empower residential households to 
generate their own electricity. The scheme has an outlay of Rs 75,021 crore and is to be 
implemented till  FY 2026 -27. Out of this, the Central Financial Assistance component for 
residential households amount to  Rs 65,700 crore. Additionally, in order to implement the 
programme , a provision has been made for Capacity Building (1% of CFA), Awareness and 
Outreach (1% of CFA) and Service Charges (1% of CFA) equivalent to  Rs 657 crore for each of 
the above components.  The administrative approval was granted to the scheme vide Order No. 
318/17/2024 -Grid Connected Rooftop dated 16th March, 2024.  
b) The Financial Outlay for the scheme includes the following: - 
CFA to Residential Consumers  ₹ 65,700 cr ore 
Incentives for Discoms  ₹ 4,950 cr ore 
Model Solar Villages in each district  ₹ 800 cr ore 
Incentives for Local Bodies  ₹ 1000 cr ore 
Payment Security Mechanism  ₹ 100 cr ore 
Innovative Projects  ₹ 500 cr ore 
Capacity Building (1% of CFA)  ₹ 657 cr ore 
Awareness & Outreach (1% of CFA)  ₹ 657 cr ore 
Service Charge (1% of CFA)  ₹ 657 cr ore 
Total  ₹ 75,021 cr ore 
 
2) Scope  

 
2 
 a) These guidelines pertain to the implementation of Sub-component 1 “Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) to residential consumers) with a financial outlay of Rs 65,700 crore as per the 
administrative approval.   
b) These guidelines shall be applicable for all applications received on the National Portal  from the 
date of the launch of the scheme, i.e. 13th February , 2024.  The scope of applicability for various 
cases are detailed in Annexure I.  
c) The existing scheme of Phase II Grid Connective Rooftop Solar Programme  having a budgetary 
outlay of Rs 11,814 crore till 2025 -26 shall be continued till the notification of the new scheme 
and get subsumed in the new scheme after such notification.   
d) The CFA and other releases for the PM – Surya  Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana shall be made from the 
budgetary outlays of Rooftop Solar Phase II Programme  till the dedicated budget allocation fo r 
the scheme are operational and disbursements can be made out from them.  
e) Once the new scheme budget is operational, the budget of Phase II programme  will get  
subsumed into the new scheme, and the new scheme funds shall  be utilized for meeting the 
ongoing liabilities of the Phase II programme  also.   
f) The CFA releases for ongoing projects against allocations made by MNRE to implementation 
agencies under Phase II shall be governed by the guidelines issued under the Phase II 
programme  and shall not be covered under the PM – Surya  Ghar Scheme CFA structure. 
However, the budgetary releases for phase II programme  shall be met through the new scheme 
outlay.  The guidelines pertaining to other components of the scheme shall be issued separately.  
g) The implementation period of the scheme shall be till 31st March, 202 7. All eligible claims shall 
be settled within the implementation period of the scheme.  
 
3) Aim and Objectives of PM  – Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana   
 
The key objectives of the programme  are:  
a) To achieve 1 crore rooftop solar system (RTS) installation in residential sector.  
b) To help provide free/low -cost electricity to 1 crore households up to 300 units of electricity per 
month by installation of rooftop solar.  

 
3 
 c) To produce renewable electricity of 1,000 billion units through the capacity installed under the 
programme , which will result in reduction of 720 million ton of CO2eq emission during the 25 
years of lifetime for rooftop solar projects.  
d) To develop the required enabling ecosystem for rooftop solar projects, including regulatory 
support, manufacturing facilities, supply chain, vendor network, operation & maintenance 
facilities, etc., in the country.  
e) To boost local economy and employment generation along with enhanced energy security  
f) To aid in achievement of India’s commitment for green climate through its NDCs (Nationally 
Determined Contributions) at UNFCCC by installation of 30 GW of solar capacity through 
rooftop solar by 2026 -27 
 
4) Strategy  
 
a) The CFA component of the Scheme will be implemented through the National Portal for PM  -
Surya Ghar (hereinafter mentioned as “the Portal” or “NP”).  
b) Vendors will register on the National Portal.  The vendors will upload their details, including 
system offerings, price points, system design and specifications , key personnel etc.  
c) The beneficiaries will apply on the National Portal and will get a unique application ID . The 
beneficiary  will select  the vendor for their rooftop solar installation assisted by various decision -
making  tools on the Portal.  
d) The beneficiary and the vendor will mutually decide the rates, system specifications, 
customization of design as per location , value added services etc ., subject to the minimum  
technical specifications mandated under the scheme.  
e) In order to ensure that the customers are not overcharged, the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy will publish benchmark prices of solar modules, inverters,  and other important 
equipment on the portal  every year .   

 
4 
 f) Once the designated vendor has been chosen and it has installed the RTS system  after due 
approvals , the concerned Distribution Utility (hereinafter referred to as “DISCOM”) shall 
conduct a physical inspection, sign the necessary agreements with the beneficiary (net meter 
agreement or otherwise), conduct a checklist -based  inspection and approve the DISCOM  
report.  
g) The scheme will establish minimum technical specifications required for rooftop solar to be 
considered eligible for the CFA. The vendors shall ensure that systems installed under the 
scheme are in adherence with all scheme guidelines.  
h) The CFA will be transferred  to the concerned account of  the beneficiary which  may either be 
the bank account of the beneficiary or the loan account of the beneficiary in case  the beneficiary 
has opted for a loan for the RTS system.  
 
5) Central Financial Assistance  
 
a) Eligibility :  
i) For the purpose of CFA, residential RTS plant would be the grid connected solar power system 
tagged to a particular residential power connection of the local DISCOM and will only include 
installations on a roof/terrace/ balcony/ elevated structures .  
ii) The CFA shall be irrespective of the size of the inverter installed. If a consumer installs a rooftop 
solar plant with a higher/lower rated inverter capacity than the number of modules, the CFA 
provided will be as per the rated DC capacity of the module system (according to the CFA 
structure) and not as per the inverter capacity.  
iii) Solar modules used in the installation must satisfy the Domestic Content Requirement condition 
i.e., domestically manufactured modules manufactured from domestically manufactured cells  
to be eligible for the CFA.  
iv) A rooftop solar installation  by residential consumers /RWAs  that has availed CFA under a 
prior /current scheme  for rooftop solar by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and has 
subsequently increased the RTS installation size shall be eligible for  additional  CFA under the 
current scheme only for the balance capacity up to 3 kW of overall RTS plant size .  

 
5 
 (1) For example, if a household had installed  a RTS of 1 kW under Phase 2 Grid Connected 
Rooftop Solar Scheme and avail ed a subsidy of Rs 14,588 , and if such a household 
enhance s the total capacity to 4 kW overall , in such a case, the household shall be 
eligible to claim an additional subsidy  under the current scheme only  for the 
additional 2 kW capacity, i.e. Rs 48,000.  
(2) Alternatively, if a household installs a RTS of 1 kW under PM – Surya Ghar scheme and 
avails a subsidy of Rs 30,000, and if such a household later enhances the total capacity 
to 4 kW overall , in such a case, the household shall be eligible to claim an additional 
subsidy under the current scheme only for the additional 2 kW capacity, i.e. Rs 48,000.  
v) A rooftop solar installation shall be eligible for CFA only once after installation. If an already 
installed rooftop solar is shifted/relocated to a new location, such a system shall not be eligible 
for CFA under the scheme.  
b) CFA Structure : The scheme will support the installation of grid -connected rooftop solar projects 
in the residential sector through Central Financial Support (CFA) support from the central 
government. No CFA will be provided to non -residential segments of consumers (inclu ding 
government segment, commercial and industrial segment etc.). The Central Financial Assistance 
for the residential sector shall be as per the following table:  

 
6 
 S. 
No. Type of Residential Segment  CFA 
1. Residential Sector (first 2 kWp of RTS capacity or part thereof)  60% of 
benchmark cost 
of 2 kWp  
2. Residential Sector (with additional RTS capacity of 1 kWp or 
part thereof)  40% of 
benchmark cost 
of additional kWp  
3. Residential Sector (additional RTS capacity beyond 3 kWp)  No additional CFA  
4. Group Housing Societies/ Residential Welfare Associations 
(GHS/RWA) etc, for common facilities including EV charging up 
to 500 kWp (@3 kWp  per house)  As per CFA of S. 
No. (2) above  
For GHS/RWAs, the upper limit of CFA supported RTS capacity is inclusive of individual rooftop 
plants installed by individual residents in the GHS/RWA.  
The GHS/RWA connection eligible under the scheme shall be dedicated only for common 
facilities and should not be utilized for provided electricity supply to residential consumers within 
the GHS/RWA . 
 
c) Benchmark Cost: The benchmark cost for 1 kW system is fixed at ₹ 50,000/kW for the first 2 
kW of RTS capacity and ₹ 45,000 for the additional kW w ith effect from 13th February, 2024. 
The benchmark for special category States ( States/U ts of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Ladakh, States in the North East including Sikkim, U ts of A&N and Lakshadweep) will be Rs 
55,000 for first 2 kW of RTS capacity and Rs 49,500 for the additional kW of RTS capacity.   
 

 
7 
 d) The benchmark cost will be revised at the time of midterm review of the programme  to reflect 
changed market trends, if any, or earlier in case of substantial upward revision in module prices 
for unforeseen reasons. The benchmark will reflect changes in solar module supply prices, 
inverter costs and other systems costs as per the method ology defined by the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy.  
 
 
e) The CFA for the scheme with effect from date of initiation, i.e., 13th February, 2024 is as follows: - 
 
S. 
No. Type of Residential Segment  CFA CFA (Special 
Category States)  
1. Residential Sector (first 2 kW p of RTS capacity 
or part thereof)  Rs 30,000/kWp  Rs 33,000/kWp  
2. Residential Sector (with additional RTS 
capacity of 1 kW p or part thereof)  Rs 18,000/kWp  Rs 19,800/kWp  
3. Residential Sector (additional RTS capacity 
beyond 3 kW p) No additional CFA  No additional CFA  
4. Group Housing Societies/ Residential Welfare 
Associations (GHS/RWA) etc, for common 
facilities including EV charging up to 500 kW p 
(@3 kW p per house)  Rs 18,000/kWp  Rs 19,800/kWp  
 To illustrate  
i. If a consumer installs a system of 1.5 kW, she is eligible for a CFA of ₹ 30,000x 1.5 = ₹ 
45,000  
ii. If a consumer installs a capacity of 2.5 kW, she is eligible for a CFA of ₹ 30,000x2 + ₹ 
18,000x0.5 = ₹ 69,000  

 
8 
 iii. If a consumer installs a capacity of 6 kW, she is eligible for a CFA of ₹ 30,000x2  + 
Rs18,000x1 = ₹ 78,000  
iv. If an RWA installs a capacity of 100 kW, with 20 households, it will be eligible for a CFA 
of ₹ 18,000x60 = ₹ 10,80,000  
v. If an RWA installs a capacity of 100 kW, with 50 households, it will be eligible for a CFA 
of ₹ 18,000x100= ₹ 18,00,000  
f) Additional State Subsidy:  The State/UT governments may supplement the CFA provided by the 
central government for the residential sector  with an additional subsidy for RTS ; however, this 
shall be subject to adherence to all scheme guidelines by the State. Such support by the 
State/UT governments shall be processed through  and integrated with  the National Portal.  
 
6)  Implementation through National Portal  
a) Consumers undertaking installations through their own in which the capital expenditure in the 
rooftop solar system has been made by the consumer, either by herself or through assistance 
of a bank loan and the upfront payment has been made to a registered RTS vendor  directly  shall 
be considered as projec ts undertaken in the capex mode . All CFA requests  for such projects  
must be made on the National Portal.  
b) In case the consumer needs any assistance in applying on the National Portal or during the 
process of installation, the DISCOMs shall assist the consumer . The DISCOMs shall set up 
designated helpdesks at all field offices for this purpose.  
c) The residential sector consumers shall be free to enter into arrangements with RTS vendors at 
mutually discovered rates . There shall be no tendering or rate discovery by the state 
DISCOMs/agencies under the scheme to empanel RTS vendors . 
d) An application shall  meet the following requirements before it is processed for release of the 
CFA:  
 

 
9 
 i. Unique Application ID with tagged Consumer Account Number: The application must be 
uploaded  on the National Portal  (https://pmsuryaghar.gov.in) with the unique valid Electricity 
Consumer Account Number (CAN)  of the consumer . The portal will assign the application with 
a unique application ID.  
 
ii. GPS Tagged Photographs of Pre-Installation Site and Complete d Installation: The photos of  Pre-
Installation Site and  installed RTS along with geo -coordinates shall  be uploaded on the National 
Portal . These photos shall be uploaded in alignment with requirements stated in Annexure II.  
 
iii. Meter Installation and Agreement : The m eter shall be  installed by DISCOM after rooftop 
installation is complete and the DISCOM and the consumer have signed the appropriate 
metering agreement which must be uploaded on the Portal. The CFA will be processed only 
after the DISCOM has physically verified the syste m, the appropriate agreements have been 
signed and the system has been commissioned by the installer after all due approvals of the 
DISCOM. A model agreement is at Annexure III. In case  of non -metered grid connected 
installations (behind -the-meter, battery hybrid systems etc.), the DISCOM will inspect the 
installation a nd  incorporate suitable remarks in the report.   
iv. DISCOM  Report  (DR) : The DR will be filled by the DISCOM representative and generated through 
the National Portal digitally. The DR format is shown in Annexure IV.   
 
v. Bank Account Details: All consumer details including bank account information and a cancelled 
cheque image/bank e -statement file/passbook scan or any other electronic document certifying 
that the bank account number is held by the concerned consumer must be submitted on the 
National Portal  by the consumer.  The NPIA shall verify the account information submitted .  
 

 
10 
 e) The release of the CFA shall be operationalized through an e -token. The e -token will be 
generated at the time of application on the National Portal. After the necessary documents 
have been uploaded and inspection by the DISCOM has been completed, the natio nal 
programme implementation agency (NPIA) will assess the documents and approve the 
release of CFA through the e -token, which will be activated with the admissible CFA amount. 
The e -token will then be redeemed by the consumer after logging in to his/her p rofile on the 
portal, resulting in transfer of CFA to the consumer.  
 
f) In case the beneficiary has opted for a loan product to finance the rooftop solar installation, the 
beneficiary profile shall also include the loan account details  (entered by the Consumer or 
through integration with banking portals) . On redemption of the e -token in such cases,  the CFA 
will be transferred to the loan account of the beneficiary.  If the CFA exceeds the loan amount 
drawn by the consumer, the CFA will be disbursed to the consumer's loan account  in the bank  
up to the amount of loan drawn , with the remainder disbursed into the consumer's bank 
account.  
 
g) The CFA shall be processed within 15 days of application meeting the requirements specified in 
para 6(c) .  
 
7) RESCO Model  
a) This mode includes all installations in which the capital expenditure in the system has been 
made by a third party other than the consumer, under an arrangement with a renewable energy 
service company (RESCO). In such installations, the RESCO continues to own the asset, and the 
roof -owner is compensated by the RESCO in return for the use of their roof. The RESCO sells 
power either to the household/households  or the DISCOM under a long term contractual 
arrangement (at least 10 years) under a Power Purchasing  Agreement or PPA.  

 
11 
 b) In case of implementation through the RESCO model, the CFA shall be paid out as  capex 
subsidy to the entity that is investing into the RTS installation and generating and selling 
power.  The CFA shall be released after the installation and the commissioning of the RTS 
systems under the RESCO arrangement. The calculation for the subsid y due shall be based on 
the size of the installation that is tagged to each consumer under the RESCO arrangement: for 
example, for a 60 kW rooftop solar installation under RESC O in 10 houses of 2 kW each and 8 
houses of 5 kW each under RESCO model, the calculation of the subsidy for which the RESCO 
is eligible shall be done on a per household basis. However, the CFA amount shall be 
disbursed to the RESCO developer as per scheme guidelines.  
c) The detailed scheme guidelines pertaining to RESCO model shall be issued separately.  
 
8) National Portal  
a) The National Portal will provide a seamless and fully integrated experience to prosumers in the 
residential sector. The portal will be fully integrated with State DISCOM portals for a 
harmonized experience for consumers in all stages of rooftop installations, including requests 
for net metering, load sanctions, inspections etc.  
b) The portal will create a public platform on which other applications, websites, financing 
intermediaries and e -commerce sites can plug into, through Application Programming  
Interfaces (APIs) and provide additional services for citizens.  
c) The portal will be augmented with GIS based services to enable better decision making and 
visualization of RTS systems for vendors and consumers. The GIS based system planning will 
also be integrated with PM -Gati Shakti Portal to leverage additional functi onalities and optimize 
power systems planning.  
d) The portal will have provisions for national registration of vendors on which vendors will be able 
to update their product offerings, sharing of system performance data, installation details etc.  
e) The National Portal will create a transparent and open marketplace for vendors by adding 
vendor feedback and vendor performance on the porta l. A vendor rating system will be 
established . 

 
12 
 f) The National Portal will be accessible through apps, chatbots and WhatsApp also, enabling 
wider outreach to all segments.  The Portal will also generate multi -level triggers for delays in 
DISCOM inspection and net meter installations and the DISCOMs shall be encouraged to ensure 
timely commissioning of RTS plants, once the vendors have installed the systems.  
g) There shall be other value -added activities such as providing basic financial modelling of the 
proposed system and consumer’s return period, entry of technical parameters of the system.  
h) The portal will provide integration with banking products offered by various financial 
institutions and will promote digital -only products for ease of use by the beneficiaries. 
Integration with Jan Samarth portal shall be done to ensure bidirectional flow of information to 
and from the National Portal to the respective financial institutions and to ensure tagging of 
loan account of consumer to the application on National Portal.  
i) An application shall be kept active on the National Portal for a period of 6 months from the date 
of application. After 6 months  of inactivity , the applica tion shall be deemed to be dormant . The 
applicant can reactivate the dormant application at any time through the consumer profile on 
the National Portal  subject to the overall limit of 1 crore active applications . 
j) As the scheme is fund limited, the receiving of applications on the National Portal shall be 
limited to 1 crore active applications  and only these applications shall be considered for release 
of CFA . Once this limit is reached, active  applications shall be given a time period of 3 months 
to complete the process as per clause 6(c) ab ove, failing which these applications will be 
deemed to be dormant and deactivated.  
k) Applica nt login will be provided on the national portal to undertake relevant activities 
pertaining to each installation including updating of status of installation, technical 
specifications of the system installed, grievance redressal, uploading of relevant pictu res (pre 
and post installation) and other items. The vendor may assist the consumer . The consumer  has 
the user rights to undertake all activities on the National Portal without relying on the vendor.  
 
9) Vendor Registration  
a) There shall be a registration of vendors on the National Portal. Vendors shall be registered 
based on submission of the following documents: - 

 
13 
 i) PAN  
ii) Key Contact Personnel  
iii) Documents of Incorporation/Proprietorship/Partnership  
iv) Key Manpower and Training Credentials   
v) Declaration as Service Provider by Vendor (Annexure V)  
vi) Bank Guarantee  
 
b) The registered vendors shall be able to specify their states and districts of operation. . The 
vendors will have to submit a Bank Guarantee of the following amount  for the initial 
registration : 
 
Type of registration  Bank Guarantee  
(Entry Level)  
State  based  vendor  registration  Rs 2.5 lakh  for each State / UT 
registered for  
National Vend or registration  Rs 25 lakh  for all States/UTs  
 
c) Once the vendors have installed a significant capacity  through the National Portal, the bank 
guarantee requirement will be indexed to the capacity  as follows:  
 
Capacity installed  Bank Guarantee  
0-200 kW  Existing Initial Bank Guarantee  
200-1000  kW Rs 15 lakh 
1000 -5000  kW Rs 50 lakh 
>5000  kW Rs 1 crore  
 

 
14 
 d) The registered vendors shall be able to create their profiles on National Portal, including RTS 
system specifications offered, prices offered and key contacts for consumers to reach out to. It 
is also expected that the vendors will respond to interest expressed by consumers in a timely 
and reasonable manner. The vendor will also specify if they are a capex mode or RESCO 
developer, and in case of both, create separate profiles for them.  
 
e) The Vendors shall be obligated to provide minimum assured set of services as detailed in 
Annexure VI and may  offer optional value added services as detailed in Annexure VII.  
 
f) The vendors will be able to respond to expression of interest by beneficiaries, manage their 
project portfolios, display offered RTS systems with price points, showcase history of completed 
projects and other attributes for the benefit of the beneficiaries . The vendor profile will also 
include vendor rating, details about consumer feedback and other data relating to the 
performance of the vendor on completed/ongoing projects for which they are the designated 
vendors.  
 
g) The Implementing agency (State DISCOM or agency) or MNRE officials or any other designated 
agency may inspect the ongoing installation or installed plants. In case the systems are not as 
per standards, nonfunctional on account of poor quality of installation, or in non -compliance of 
scheme guidelines, NPIA will reserve the right to deactivate the vendor and de -register it fro m 
the National Portal registration list as applicable.  
 
10) Technical Specifications  
a) A Roof Top Solar (RTS) Photo Voltaic (PV) system shall consist of  equipment/components like 
Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) modules, Inverter/micro inverters, Module Mounting structures, 
Energy Meter, Array Junction Boxes, DC Distribution Box, AC Distribution Box, Protections – 
Earthing, Lightning, Surge, Cables, Drawing & Manuals and any other necessary component 
based upon the site requirement. The projects under the scheme shall be commissioned as per 
the technical specifications as published by MNRE ( Detailed  in Annex VII).  

 
15 
  
b) The vendors shall ensure that the minimum technical specifications as detailed by MNRE as well 
as those required by extant State regulations are met. The vendor will be solely responsible for 
any shortcomings or negligence/malpractice which may lead to encashment of bank 
guarantees, deactivation of profile, blacklisting of the firm/vendor from participation and other 
possible d isciplinary actions. Any deficiency of the RTS system leading to non -disbursal of 
CFA/non -commissioning of the RTS by the DISCOM on account of system quality/component 
issues shall be rectified by the vendor .  
 
c) One requirement for CFA is that  Domestic Modules  manufactured from domestic cells  as per 
Domestic Content Requirement (DCR)  are used  failing which no CFA shall be disbursed . 
 
d) The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy may notify, from time to time, the approved list of 
modules and inverters which will be eligible for availing CFA based on minimum specified 
technical criteria in order to prevent supply  of poor quality equipment by vendors. The vendors 
must use one of these modules and inverters in all projects being installed under the scheme.   
 
e) The Original Equipment Manufacturers of inverters enlisted under the scheme will also have to 
share generation data reporting from their systems through API integration with the National  
Portal. Any data generated and transmitted by these inverter systems should be integrated with 
the National Portal and shall be utilized to provide better services to the beneficiary through 
the portal.  
 
f) Registered vendors shall provide the services to the beneficiaries  for repairs/maintenance  of 
the RTS plant free of cost for 5 years of the Comprehensive Maintenance Contract (CMC) period 
from the date of commissioning of the plan. Non -performing/ under -performing PV panels will 
be replaced free of cost in the warranty period.  The beneficiary  shall  be provided with the 
specified warranties given by  the respective  OEMs on the system components for any future 
replacement of malfunctioned components . 

 
16 
  
11) Ensuring Quality of Installations  
a) The Scheme Implementation Agencies (National Programme  Implementation Agency (NPIA) 
nationally and State Implementation Agencies (SIA) at State level) as well as other designated 
agencies by State/UT governments shall conduct regular inspections of RTS systems installed 
under the scheme, both at the time of commissioning and post commissioning.  
 
b) The NPIA shall  establish  adequate mechanism to ensure independent third party assessment of 
RTS installations at time of commissioning of at least 1% of installations and post -installation 
inspection of at least 1% of installed systems.  
 
c) The SIA shall establish adequate mechanism to ensure independent third party assessment of 
RTS as post -installation inspection of at least 5% of installed systems  annually . At least 5% of DR 
shall be done in presence of an officer not below rank of AE and at least 1% of DR shall be done 
in presence of an officer not below rank of EE to ensure quality installations.  
 
d) All the vendors registered on the National Portal shall be given a vendor rating depending on 
the size and scale of installations done, consumer feedback, reporting of data, physical 
inspection of quality of workmanship of randomized project sites and other criteria as per 
separate guidelines that will be notified  by the Ministry. This vendor rating shall be visible to 
the beneficiaries on the National Portal.  
 
12) Grievance Redressal  
a) The beneficiaries and vendors can raise grievances through the National Portal that will be 
channeled for resolution to the State Implementation Agency through a 2 tier escalation matrix. 
The grievances have to be resolved as per the timelines detailed in Annexure VIII failing  which 
the grievance will get escalated to the NPIA.  
b) The NPIA will establish the necessary mechanisms for ensuring that grievances raised on the 
National Portal are resolved within a period of 30 days.  

 
17 
 c) The beneficiaries and vendors will get regular updates regarding status of grievances through 
SMSes, emails and other channels of communication.  
d) The grievances may be raised through the National Call Centre, State/UT DISCOMs, National 
Portal or the portal app. In each case, a unique tracking ID will be created by the NPIA for the 
consumer to track the status of resolution of the grievance through an online system.  
 
13) Memorandum of Understanding  
a) A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) shall be signed under the scheme between Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy and the State/UT Energy Department within 3 months of 
notification of these guidelines. The Draft MoU between MNRE and the State/UTs is as per 
Annexure IX.  
b) Release of funds  under other scheme components (Incentives to DISCOMs, Model Solar Village, 
Incentives to PRIs/ULBs, Payment Security Mechanism etc.) to State/UTs or entities under the 
State/UTs shall be conditional to signing of the MoU with the concerned State/UT.  
c) The MoU will also be essential for allowing the release of additional state/UT subsidy for RTS to 
beneficiaries under the scheme.  
 
14) Implementation Agency   
a) REC Limited shall initially be the Implementation Agency at the national level (National 
Programme  Implementation Agency ( NPIA)) and shall undertake activities relating to operation 
of the National Portal and registration of vendors at the national level as well as all other 
scheme related activities. However, MNRE will have the discretion to designate any other 
agency as the  NPIA as per any exigency.  
 

 
18 
 b) The DISCOMs shall be the State Implementation Agencies (SIA) at the State/UT  level . However, 
State Governments may notify any other agency as an implementation agency. DISCOMs shall 
ensure adherence to timelines specified for provisioning of services for prosumers and shall 
coordinate with NPIA on matters pertaining to performance of ve ndors registered on the 
National Portal , grievance redressal, programme  monitoring at State/UT level and other 
responsibilities ascribed to it by MNRE from time to time . 
 
c) The primary responsibility of monitoring and reporting will be with the implementing agencies 
i.e. DISCOMs and NPIA and they may carry out 3rd party inspection through National 
Monitors/Consultants, for ground verification/performance evaluation on a rando m basis . 
15) Programme  Monitoring  
 
a) A Group of Ministers (GoM) will provide overall guidance and coordination with States /UTs . 
 
b) A Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary and including Secretaries 
of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy , Department  of Financial Services, Ministry of Power, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Rural Development shall monitor the 
implementation of the scheme from time to time.  
 
c) The implementation of the scheme shall be overseen by the Mission Directorate in the Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy. The Directorate shall be headed by Additional/Joint Secretary 
in charge of Rooftop Solar and the Directorate shall be authorized to i ssue all 
instructions/guidelines/frameworks pertaining to the scheme after due approvals.  
 
d) The States/UTs shall constitute a State Level Coordination Committee headed by the Chief 
Secretary/Administrator and comprising of Secretaries of key departments at the State/UT 
level.  The Committee shall meet once every three months or more regularly to oversee the 
implementation of the scheme in the State/UT.  
 

 
19 
 e) The States/UTs shall also constitute a District Level Committee headed by the District 
Magistrate/District Collector and comprising of other members including 2 elected 
representatives from the Urban Local Bodies/Panchayati Raj Institutions , Lead Bank Manager, 
Divisional DISCOM official, State Nodal Agency representative in the district (if any) and at least 
3 non -official members to be nominated by the Mission Directorate . The Committee shall meet 
once every two months or more regularly to oversee the impl ementation of the scheme in the 
State/UT.  
 
16) Financing  
 
a) The beneficiaries under the scheme may additionally benefit from lending instruments created 
for rooftop solar under the scheme. This may include low interest products created specifically 
for beneficiaries upto 3 kW systems or standardized products for ot her beneficiaries. In both 
cases, the beneficiary shall enter the details of the beneficiary’s loan account utilized for the 
rooftop solar installation so that the CFA amount can flow directly into the loan account for 
prepayment of certain share of the lo an amount.  
 
b) The national portal will be integrated with Jan Samarth portal to channel the applications of 
beneficiaries under the scheme to apply for loans at the relevant banks. The portal shall also be 
integrated with any other financial instruments that may be offered by banks or other fi nancial 
institutions.   
 
c) The banks and other financial institutions will be encouraged to come out with standardized 
banking products. The standard loan products from the partner Banks /FIs will be published on 
the portal.  
 
17) Roles of Stakeholders  
a) Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India  

 
20 
 i) Enlist product lines of modules, inverters (including hybrid/ micro inverters ) and other major 
system components . 
ii) MNRE or its designated agency shall collect a bank guarantee of the appropriate amount as 
notified from time to time from the prospective vendors for their empanelment for the 
installation of the residential projects through the National Portal .  
iii) MNRE shall release the eligible performance -linked incentives to DISCOMs based on the 
performance achieved in the previous financial year.  
iv) MNRE or any other agency on behalf of MNRE shall conduct the physical inspection of the 
installed RTS power plants to verify the quality and technical standards. If it is not found to be 
satisfactory, MNRE may deduct the same percentage of the service char ge as decided by the 
competent authority.  
v) MNRE shall be responsible for encouraging large and established players in the renewable 
energy ecosystem to enter into the residential rooftop solar market.  
vi) MNRE shall be responsible for establishing a robust vendor rating programme  to recognize high 
performance vendors with quality installations.  
 
b) National Programme  Implementation Agency  
The NPIA shall be responsible for the overall implementation of the scheme  (all components)  
which shall include the following major components: - 
i) Development, operations and management of the National Portal and its value added features 
such as GIS planning, integration with Jan Samarth and other portals, integration with DISCOM 
portals, updation of knowledge portal, skill database integration etc.  
ii) Development, implementation and monitoring of IEC plans including content and 
dissemination, grievance redressal  of vendors, DISCOMs and consumers . 
iii) Sample examination of CFA claims by scrutiny of uploaded photos, GPS location based checks, 
verification of account details and electricity bill connection details, received through all 
channels, including portal or directly through DISCOMs, capex or RESCO mode or otherwise . 

 
21 
 iv) Creation of RTS Cell/PMU/PMC for overall programme  implementation or its components 
within the NPIA or in the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy to assist the Mission 
Directorate as per the requirements of the Directorate . 
v) Engagement and collaboration with all stakeholders, including vendor networks, consumers, 
banks and other financial institutions, multilateral institutions, think tanks for promotion of 
rooftop solar in general, and residential rooftop solar in particular . 
vi) Coordination with all government institutions, including Ministries and Departments at central 
and State government levels, and public sector undertakings for facilitation and monitoring of 
rooftop installation targets in government sector.  
vii) Make recommendations to the Ministry on modifications in scheme 
implementation/guidelines/frameworks/standards/qualifications and any other scheme 
documents based on implementation feedback.  
viii) To conduct periodic national, regional and State level workshops with all stakeholders . 
ix) To receive proposals, applications and requests from State/UT DISCOMs and to assist the 
mission directorate in disposal of such proposals in alignment with the scheme guidelines . 
x) To coordinate and engage with other Ministries and Departments and non -government 
channels such as volunteer networks to popularize the scheme and to generate applications 
from consumers . 
xi) To set in place, the necessary mechanisms for third party audits of the scheme, including 
performance and outcome audits periodically and to set in place mechanism to ensure 
adequate randomized physical verification of installations to ensure proper perfor mance of 
vendors and DISCOMs under the schem e. 
xii) To coordinate with State regulatory commissions to implement rooftop solar -friendly 
regulations . 
xiii) Compliance with any other directions given by the Scheme Mission Directorate . 
 
c) State Implementation Agencies  

 
22 
 The SIA shall normally be the DISCOM/Distribution Utility in the State/UT. However, the 
State government may designate another agency as an additional SIA in order to assist the 
DISCOM in implementation of the PM Suryaghar Scheme. The roles of SIA shall include:  
i) Create a dedicated rooftop solar vertical in the DISCOM administrative set up with adequate 
manpower up to the field level, with clearly defined work profiles and levels of escalation for all 
issues pertaining to installation of RTS in their area . 
ii) To map the dedicated manpower to the National Portal or the integrated State portal for 
channeling of applications for feasibility approval, inspection, net metering and meter 
installations . 
iii) To bring timelines relating to service delivery relating to RTS and associated services (name 
change, load change etc) in alignment with national rules and State level regulations . 
iv) To develop a time bound grievance redressal mechanism as per the scheme guidelines . 
v)  To coordinate with State regulatory commission to implement rooftop solar -friendly 
regulations . 
vi) To train field level operatives on proper inspection of installed RTS systems prior to 
commissioning and to update DR on the National Portal  properly for CFA release . 
vii) To establish and operate IT solutions for tracking of consumer electricity generation and 
integration with billing systems to regularly update households on financial benefits (including 
surplus settlement)  
viii) To  ensure a ready supply chain of net meters, and to expand meter inspection and sealing 
capacity to address the demand adequately and to ensure zero wait time for net meters for 
residential consumers . 
ix) To formulate and implement dedicated State level IEC activities in compliance with scheme 
guidelines . 
x) To integrate the National Portal with the DISCOM IT systems and any additional IT systems for 
rooftop solar being operated by the DISCOM . 

 
23 
 xi) To set in place, the necessary mechanisms for third party audits of the scheme, including 
performance and outcome audits periodically and to set in place mechanism to ensure 
adequate randomized physical verification of installations to ensure proper perfor mance of 
vendors under the scheme . 
xii) Coordination with all government institutions, including Ministries and Departments at State 
government levels, and State public sector undertakings for facilitation and monitoring of 
rooftop installation targets in government sector.  
xiii) Vetting of CFA claims by onsite inspection, scrutiny of uploaded photos, GPS location based 
checks, verification of account details and electricity bill connection details, DCR fulfillment and 
any other conditions established by these guidelines and to upd ate the National Portal 
accordingly in a timely manner . 
xiv) Compliance with any other directions given by the Scheme Mission Directorate . 
 
18) Rooftop Solar on Government Building  
a) All Government rooftops under the administrative control of Central Government 
Ministries/ Departments , including autonomous bodies, subordinate offices etc. shall be 
saturated with rooftop solar to the extent possible technically  by 2025 . Ministries may  utilize 
available rooftop space through the RESCO model or capex mode on a priority basis. Through 
high levels of automation and energy generation data flows, investment in RESCO models in 
government rooftops may  be de -risked and enable enforcement and monit oring of contracts 
without major administrative overheads .  
b) The Central Public Sector Enterprises with experience in deployment of renewable energy 
technologies will be allocated on a nomination basis to Central Ministries for assisting these 
Ministries in deploying rooftop solar on their assets on a priority basis . 
c) MNRE will monitor and track installations in the Government sector. All Central 
Ministries/Departments will collate information regarding available potential and expedite 
coverage to ensure saturation of government assets by 2025. All buildings under Centr al 
Government shall deploy RTS in mission mode to achieve saturation by 2025. State/UTs shall 
be encouraged to undertake a similar exercise for RTS saturation in their buildings  

 
24 
 d) Detailed guidelines regarding role of CPSEs and use of payment security mecha nism shall be 
issued separately.  
19) Rooftop Solar in Commercial and Industrial and other sectors  
a) There shall be no CFA for C&I  and other sectors.  
b) Investment de -risking efforts shall be promoted to enable C&I segment to confidently and easily 
deploy RTS. These measures will include regulatory recognition of new and innovative business 
models for RTS, measures proposed include option of single window facility for clearances, if 
any, encouraging financial institutions and intermediaries to create targeted financial products 
for RTS (including instruments of partial credit risk guarantee) for MSME segment etc . 
 
20) Non -Subsidized Residential Rooftop Solar  
 
a) Consumers who opt for installing RTS without availing CFA under this scheme, including those 
who may wish to forgo the RTS CFA (under the “Give It Up” campaign or otherwise) shall be 
free to do so without using domestically manufactured cells/modules (Domestic Content 
Requirement or DCR).   
b) The facility for forgoing CFA under the scheme as a part of the “Give It Up” campaign shall be 
created on the National Portal. Such consumers w ould  still be able to access all facilities of the 
National Portal as well as linkages with banks for necessary financial products as per availability. 
This segment will benefit from non -financial easement of processes and standardized financing 
products creat ed by banks through the National Portal.  
 
21) Financing  
 
a) It is envisaged that standardized low interest loan products in the range of benchmark rates 
(Repo + 50 bps) for installation of residential RTS systems that are up to 3 kW in size will be 
made available to the beneficiaries by Banks.  
b) These financing options shall be supplemented by standardized products of similar nature for 
non-subsidized segments also, including residential sector RTS of sizes more than 3 kW.  

 
25 
 22) Domestic Content Requirement on cells and modules  
a) The scheme CFA shall be released only for installations in residential sector that use 
domestically manufactured modules with domestically manufactured cells.  
 
23) Metering Arrangements  
a) All metering arrangements (net metering, gross metering, net billing, virtual net metering, 
group net metering etc.) approved by the respective Electricity Regulatory Commissions  of 
States/UTs shall be covered under the scheme.  
b) Systems that are not feeding into the grid but are connected to the grid (behind -the-meter 
systems, battery hybrid systems etc.)  shall be eligible for CFA under the scheme  subject to  
approval  by the respective Electricity Regulatory Commissions.  
24)  Technology  
a) The rooftop solar installation may include additional technology components such as small 
wind hybrids, battery s torage, solar tracker systems etc. However, the CFA calculation shall be 
based on the CFA structure under the scheme as per capacity of solar modules installed in the 
system.  
 
  

 
26 
 Annexures  
Annexure I   
Applicability of the CFA  for applications on the National Portal   
 
Application  received  under Phase II rooftop solar programme  (before 13th Feb 2024)  
Sr. No  Parameter  Applicable Subsidy  
1 First instance of claims submission 
before 5th Jan  Rs. 14,588/kW for upto 3 kW capacity and 
thereafter Rs. 7,294/kW till 10kW capacity  
(Subsidy prevailing before revision on 
05.01.2024)  
2 First instance of claims submission on 
and after 5th Jan  Rs. 18,000/kw for upto 3kW capacity and 
thereafter Rs. 9,000/kw till 10kW capacity  
(revised subsidy as per notification dated 
05.01.2024)  
Note:  all applications received prior to launch of PM - Surya Ghar : Muft Bijli Yojana ( before 13th 
Feb 2024 shall be covered under the Phase II rooftop solar programme ) and shall be eligible for 
the CFA as indicate above.  All applications submitted under the Phase II of rooftop solar 
programme  shall be admissible for CFA if the claim is received till October 2024. The claims 
received after October 2024 will not be entertained . 
Application received under PM - Surya Ghar : Muft Bijli Yojana (on and after 13th Feb 2024)  
1 All applications made on and after 13th 
Feb 60% of benchmark cost upto 2 kW capacity 
and 30% for 1 kW additional capacity. No 
subsidy beyond 3 kW.  
(as approved under PM -Surya Ghar: Muft 
Bijli Yojana)  
 

 
27 
 The CFA claims from installations undertaken in tender mode by respective 
DISCOMs/implementation agencies under previous programme s for Rooftop Solar shall be 
considered under the guidelines of the respective programme s and not PM Suryaghar. The CFA 
calculation shall also be as per the respective programme  guidelines.  
  

 
28 
 Annexure II  Photographs  
 
  Photograph requirements  
1. Photograph with all installed modules clearly viewed 
(front view or side/ isometric view  of the installation)   
2. Photograph of the safety devices such as earthing, LA and 
surge protection devices installed   
3. Photograph of the net metering devices / net meter or 
solar generation meter (generation units /kW produced 
should be clearly visible in the photograph)   
4. Photograph of the Beneficiary with overall RTS 
installation (aesthetic view of installation quality is visible)   

 
29 
 Annexure III  Net meter Model Agreement  
Net Metering Connection Agreement  
   
  
This Agreement is made and entered into at (location) …………….. on this (date) …………….. day  
of (month) …………………. (year) …………… between the Eligible Consumer (Name) …………… having 
premises at (address) ……………… and Consumer No. ……………… as the first Party,  
  
AND  
  
The Distribution Licensee ………………………………. (hereinafter referred to as 'the Licensee') and 
having its Registered Office at (address) …………………………………. as second Party of this 
Agreement.  
  
Whereas, the Eligible Consumer has applied to the Licensee for approval of a Net Metering 
Arrangement under the provisions of the (State Guidelines reference name) 
……………………………………………………. and subsequent amendments and sought its connectivity to 
the Licensee' s Distribution Network.  
  
And whereas, the Licensee has agreed to provide Network connectivity to the Eligible Consumer 
for injection of electricity generated from its Roof -top Renewable Energy  
Generating System of …………….. kilowatt (kW)  
Both Parties hereby agree as follows: -  
  
1. Eligibility :  
  

 
30 
 The Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating System meets the applicable norms for being 
integrated into the Distribution Network, and that the Eligible Consumer shall maintain the 
System accordingly for the duration of this Agreement.  
  
2. Technical and Inter -connection Requirements :  
  
2.1. The metering arrangement and the inter -connection of the Roof -top Renewable Energy 
Generating System with the Network of the Licensee shall be as per the provisions of the Net 
Metering Regulations and the technical standards and norms specified by the Central Electricity 
Authority for connectivity of distributed generation resources and for the installati on and 
operation of meters.  
  
2.2. The Eligible Consumer agrees that he shall install, prior to connection of the Roof -top 
Renewable Energy Generating System  to the Network of the Licensee, an isolation device (both 
automatic and in built within inverter and external manual relays); and the Licensee shall have 
access to it if required for the repair and maintenance of the Distribution Network.  
  
2.3. The Licensee shall specify the interface/inter -connection point and metering point.  
  
2.4. The Eligible Consumer shall furnish all relevant data, such as voltage, frequency, circuit breaker, 
isolator position in his System, as and when required by the Licensee.  
 
2.5. All the equipment connected to Network of the Licensee at the time of installation shall be 
compliant with the Technical Specifications for rooftop system as Published by MNRE.  
  
3. Safety :  
  

 
31 
 3.1. The consumer shall comply with the Central Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety 
and Electricity Supply) Regulations 2010  
 
3.2. The equipment connected to the Licensee's Distribution System shall be compliant with 
relevant International (IEEE/IEC) or Indian Standards (BIS), as the case may be, and the 
installation of electrical equipment shall comply with the requirements specified  by the Central 
Electricity Authority regarding safety and electricity supply.  
  
3.3. The design, installation, maintenance and operation of the Roof -top Renewable Energy 
Generating System  shall be undertaken in a manner conducive to the safety of the Roof -top 
Renewable Energy Generating System  as well as the Licensee's Network.  
  
3.4. If, at any time, the Licensee determines that the Eligible Consumer's Roof -top  Renewable 
Energy Generating System is causing or may cause damage to and/or results in the Licensee's 
other consumers or its assets, the Eligible Consumer shall disconnect the Roof -top Renewable 
Energy Generating System  from the distribution Network upon direction from the Licensee and 
shall undertake corrective measures at his own expense prior to re -connection.  
  
3.5. The Licensee shall not be responsible for any accident resulting in injury to human beings or 
animals or damage to property that may occur due to back - feeding from the Roof -top 
Renewable Energy Generating System  when the grid supply is off. The Licensee may disconnect 
the installation at any time in the event of such exigencies to prevent such accident.  
  
4. Other Clearances and Approvals :  
  
The Eligible Consumer shall obtain any statutory approvals and clearances that may be required, 
such as from the Electrical Inspector or the municipal or other authorities, before connecting 
the Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating System  to the distribution Network.  
  

 
32 
 5. Period of Agreement, and Termination :  
  
This Agreement shall be for a period for 25 years, but may be terminated prematurely.   
(a) By mutual consent; or  
(b) By the Eligible Consumer, by giving 30 days' notice to the Licensee.  
(c) By the Licensee, by giving 30 days' notice, if the Eligible Consumer breaches any terms of this 
Agreement or the provisions of the Net Metering Regulations and does not remedy such breach 
within 30 days, or such other reasonable period as may be provided, of receiving notice of such 
breach, or for any other valid reason communicated by the Licensee in writing.  
  
6. Access and Disconnection:   
  
6.1. The Eligible Consumer shall provide access to the Licensee to the metering equipment and 
disconnecting devices of Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating System , both automatic and 
manual, by the Eligible Consumer.  
  
6.2. If, in an emergent or outage situation, the Licensee cannot access the disconnecting devices of 
the Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating System , both automatic and manual, it may 
disconnect power supply to the premises.  
  
6.3. Upon termination of this Agreement under Clause 5, the Eligible Consumer shall disconnect the 
Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating System  forthwith from the Network of the Licensee.  
  
7. Liabilities :  
  
7.1. The Parties shall indemnify each other for damages or adverse effects of either Party's 
negligence or misconduct during the installation of the Roof -top Renewable Energy Generating 
System , connectivity with the distribution Network and operation of the System.  
  

 
33 
 7.2. The Parties shall not be liable to each other for any loss of profits or revenues, business 
interruption losses, loss of contract or goodwill, or for indirect, consequential, incidental or 
special damages including, but not limited to, punitive or exemplar y damages, whether any of 
these liabilities, losses or damages arise in contract, or otherwise.  
  
8. Commercial Settlement :  
  
8.1. The commercial settlements under this Agreement shall be in accordance with the Net 
Metering Regulations.  
  
8.2. The Licensee shall not be liable to compensate the Eligible Consumer if his Rooftop  Renewable 
Energy Generating System  is unable to inject surplus power generated into the Licensee's 
Network on account of failure of power supply in the grid/Network.  
  
8.3. The existing metering System, if not in accordance with the Net Metering Regulations, shall be 
replaced by a bi -directional meter (whole current/CT operated) or a pair of meters (as per the 
definition of 'Net Meter' in the Regulations), and a separate gene ration meter may be provided 
to measure Solar power generation. The bi -directional meter (whole current/CT operated) or 
pair of meters shall be installed at the inter -connection point to the Licensee's Network for 
recording export and import of energy.  
  
8.4. The uni -directional and bi -directional or pair of meters shall be fixed in separate meter boxes in 
the same proximity.   
  
9. Connection Costs:  
  
The Eligible Consumer shall bear all costs related to the setting up of the Roof -top Renewable 
Energy Generating System , excluding the Net Metering Arrangement costs.  
  

 
34 
 10. Dispute Resolution:  
  
10.1. Any dispute arising under this Agreement shall be resolved promptly, in good faith and in an 
equitable manner by both the Parties.  
  
10.2. The Eligible Consumer shall have recourse to the concerned Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Forum constituted under the relevant Regulations in respect of any grievance regarding billing 
which has not been redressed by the Licensee.  
  
In the witness where of …………… (name) for and on behalf of Eligible Consumer and Shri. 
……………….. (name) for and on behalf of Licensee agree to this agreement.  
  
  
Signed by  
 
 
…………………………………                                                                        ……………..………………  
(First Party)                                                                                                 (Second Party)  
 
Witnesses:                
  
  
1) Signature with Name and Address:                                               2) Signature with Name and Address 
   
 
……………………………………                                                   ……………………………………  
……………………………………                                                   ……………………………………  
……………………………………                                                   ……………………………………   

 
35 
 Annexure IV  DISCOM  Report  
Consumer Details  
Name of the Applicant   
Consumer Account Number   
Aadhar Card Number   
Address   
Mobile Number   
GPS Coordinates   
Metering Arrangement Type  Net meter / Gross 
meter / Net billing  
DISCOM Details  
Name of the DISCOM   
Name of the DISCOM Nodal Person   
Designation   
Mobile Number   
Vendor Details  
Name of the Company   
Name of the Contact person   
Designation of the Contact person   
Mobile Number   
Inspection Details  
Date of Inspection  Click or tap to enter a 
date.  
Time of Inspection  HH/MM  
Rooftop solar capacity as per application (kWp)   
Rooftop solar capacity actually installed (kWp)   
Module Configuration   
Module OEM Details   

 
36 
 Module Type   
Module id   
Inverter OEM   
Inverter Type   
Inverter Capacity (AC) Nominal output power   
Inverter ID   
Meter id   
DISCOM Check list  
Copy of electricity bill has been uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Geo-coordinates have been uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Photos of installed RTS has been uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Net meter has been installed             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Commissioning inspection of the RTS is completed             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Bank account information and a cancelled cheque image has been 
uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Solar modules are installed as per the DCR requirement             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Inverter has capability to send generation data online             ☐No        ☐Yes 
DCR undertaking is verified & uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
DISCOM report  signed by the  DISCOM official has been uploaded             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Quality Check  
Building Safety (LA and earthing separate from equipment 
earthing)             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Equipment Safety (RTS plant earthing)             ☐No        ☐Yes 
DCR equipment (domestically manufactured modules and cells)             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Manufacturing, design and workmanship warranty for a minimum 
period of 5 years             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Certified and tested Meter has been installed             ☐No        ☐Yes 

 
37 
 Equipment compliant to basic technical standards as per: 
https://pmsuryaghar.gov.in/pdf/Technical_Specifications_np.pdf .            ☐No        ☐Yes 
Declaration  
DISCOM certifies that the inspection is conducted and the RST is 
compliant to the guideline of MNRE             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Consumer certifies that he/she has not taken benefits of any prior 
CFA for the rooftop project on the address mentioned in the 
report.             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Vendor certifies that the work of installation is carried out in 
compliance with the guidelines of MNRE             ☐No        ☐Yes 
Photograph requirements  
1. Photograph with all installed modules clearly viewed (front view  
or side/ isometric view  of the installation )  
2. Photograph of the safety devices such as earthing, LA and surge 
protection devices installed   

 
38 
  
The above system is as per BIS / MNRE specifications and has been checked for its performance 
on Click or tap to enter a date.  and it is working satisfactorily.  
Signature of the Nodal Officer with Stamp  
 
  3. Photograph of the net metering devices / net meter or solar 
generation meter (generation units /kW produced should be 
clearly visible in the photograph)   
4. Photograph of the Beneficiary with overall RTS installation 
(aesthetic view of installation quality is visible)   

 
39 
 Annexure V  Format of Declaration from Vendor  
  


 
40 
 Annexure VI  Part A (Minimum Assured Services)  
S.No.  Services Name  
1.  DCR equipment (domestically manufactured modules and cells)  
2.  List of equipment and compliance to basic technical standards as per: 
https://pmsuryaghar.gov.in/pdf/Technical_Specifications_np.pdf . 
3.  Trained Professionals for undertaking installation  
4.  Mounting Structure capable of withstanding wind load as per required standard 
and compliance with IS875 Part 3  
5.  Equipment Safety (RTS plant earthing)  
6.  Building Safety (LA and earthing separate from equipment earthing)  
7.  User Manuals for equipment  
8.  Maintenance schedule (preventive and corrective) and methodology  
9.  Scheme Logo on the rooftop solar equipment like modules etc.  
10.  Project Commissioning Report  
11.  Manufacturing, design and workmanship warranty for a minimum period of 5 years  
12.  Free of cost comprehensive maintenance contract (CMC) including warranty for 5 
years period from the date of commissioning  
13.  Retrofitting or grouting on the rooftop if required as per roof condition  
 
  

 
41 
 Annexure VII  Part B (Optional Value added services)  
S. No.  Services Name  
1.  GIS based design  
2.  Customized design as per the requirement of the consumer  
3.  Calculator / estimation for rooftops solar system (RTS) generation and returns/ 
savings calculations  
4.  Data base maintenance for the consumers  
5.  On request generation data (inverter or online)  
6.  Module cleaning system operation methodology  
7.  Weather monitoring system (irradiation sensor, temperature sensor)  
 
  

 
42 
 Annexure VIII  Technical specifications  
Solar PV Module / Panel Technical Specifications  
IEC 61215 and IS 
14286  Design Qualification and Type Approval for Crystalline Silicon 
Terrestrial Photovoltaic (PV) Modules  
IEC 61701:2011  Salt Mist Corrosion Testing of Photovoltaic (PV) Modules  
IEC 61853 - 1:2011 /  
IS 16170 -1:2014  Photovoltaic (PV) module performance testing and energy rating 
–: Irradiance and temperature performance measurements, and 
power Rating.  
IEC 62716  Photovoltaic (PV) Modules – Ammonia (NH3) Corrosion Testing (as 
per the site condition like dairies, toilets etc)  
IEC 61730 -1,2  Photovoltaic (PV) Module Safety Qualification – Part 1:  
Requirements for Construction, Part 2: Requirements for Testing  
IEC 62804  
  Photovoltaic (PV) modules – Test method for detection of potential 
induced degradation. IEC 62804 -1: Part 1: Crystalline Silicon  
Solar PV Inverters  
IEC 62109 or IS : 
16221  Safety of power converters for use in photovoltaic power systems 
– Part 1: General requirements, and Safety of power converters 
for use in photovoltaic power systems  
Part 2: Particular requirements for inverters. Safety compliance 
(Protection degree IP 65 or better for outdoor mounting, IP 54 
or better for indoor mounting)  
IS/IEC 61683 latest  Photovoltaic Systems – Power conditioners: Procedure for  
(as applicable)  Measuring Efficiency (10%, 25%, 50%, 75% & 90 -100% Loading 
Conditions)  
IEC 60068 -2 /IEC 62093  
(as applicable)  Environmental Testing of PV System – Power Conditioners and 
Inverters  
IEC 62116:2014/ IS16169   Utility -interconnected photovoltaic inverters - Test procedure of 
islanding prevention measures  

 
43 
 Fuses   
IS/IEC 60947 (Part 1, 2 & 
3), EN 50521   General safety requirements for connectors, switches, circuit 
breakers (AC/DC):  
1)Low -voltage Switchgear and Control -gear, Part 1: General rules  
2)Low -Voltage Switchgear and Control -gear, Part 2: Circuit 
Breakers  
3)Low -voltage switchgear and Control -gear, Part 3: Switches, 
disconnectors switch -disconnectors and fuse -combination units 4) 
EN 50521: Connectors for photovoltaic system -Safety 
requirements and tests  
  
IEC 60269 -6:2010  Low-voltage fuses - Part 6: Supplementary requirements for fuse 
links for the protection of solar photovoltaic energy systems  
Solar PV Roof Mounting Structure  
IS 2062/IS 4759/AA6063  
T6  Material for the structure mounting  
Surge Arrestors  
BFC 17 -102:2011/ NFC 
102:2011/ IEC 62305   Lightening Protection Standard  
IEC 60364 -5-53/ IS 
15086 -5 (SPD)  IEC 
61643 - 11:2011  Electrical installations of buildings - Part 5 -53: Selection and 
erection of electrical equipment - Isolation, switching and control 
Low-voltage surge protective devices - Part 11: Surge protective 
devices connected to low -voltage power systems - Requireme nts 
and test methods  
Cables   
IEC 60227/IS 694, IEC  
60502/IS 1554 (Part 1 &  
2)/ IEC69947 (as 
applicable)   General test and measuring method for PVC (Polyvinyl chloride) 
insulated cables (for working voltages up to and including 1100 
V, and UV resistant for outdoor installation)  

 
44 
  
• The rooftop solar system should be installed on rooftops/terraces or elevated 
structures. In case of elevated structure, a minimum ground clearan ce of 8  feet must be 
provided in order to be considered eligible for the CFA under the scheme.  
• It is advised that the module capacity shall not be greater than 20% of the inverter 
capacity    
BS EN 50618  Electric cables for photovoltaic systems (BT(DE/NOT)258), mainly 
for DC Cables  
Earthing /Lightning  
IEC 62561/IEC 60634 
Series  
(Chemical earthing) (as 
applicable)  IEC 62561 -1: Lightning protection system components (LPSC) -  
Part: Requirements for connection components  
IEC 62561 -2: Lightning protection system components (LPSC) –  
Part 2: Requirements for conductors and earth electrodes  
IEC 62561 -7: Lightning protection system components (LPSC) - Part 
7: Requirements for earthing enhancing compounds  
Junction Boxes  
IEC 60529  Junction boxes and solar panel terminal boxes shall be of the 
thermo - plastic type with IP 65 or better protection for outdoor 
use, and IP 54 or better protection for indoor use  

 
45 
 Annexure IX  Types of Grievance  
For Grievances received through National Portal , the grievance is automatically allocated to the concerned nodal officer depending 
upon category,  there are two levels of escalation: Level 1 and Level 2. The submitted grievance is forwarded to the Level 1 Grievance 
Officer for review and resolution. Co ncerned officials assess the grievance, gather additional information if necessary, and determine 
the appropriate course of action. In case of no response by Level 1 officer within 7 days,  the ticket gets auto matically flagged to Level 
2 officer.  
 
 
 
 
For Grievances received through the call center, call center would act as Level 0 officer, after which the grievance could be  passed 
on to Level 1 in case the problem is not resolved within 24 hours . The submitted grievance is forwarded to the Level 1 Grievance 
Officer for review and resolution. Concerned officials assess the grievance, gather additional information if necessary, and determine 
the appropriate course of action. In case of no response by Level 1 officer within 7 days , the ticket gets automati cally flagged to Level 
2 officer.  
 
 
 
 
 Consumer logs 
grievanceLevel 1 Redressal –
7 daysLevel 2 Redressal –
7 days
Consumer logs 
grievanceLevel 0 Redressal 
–24 hrsLevel 1 Redressal 
–7 daysLevel 2 Redressal 
–7 days

 
46 
 Throughout the process, users receive updates on the status of their grievance via the online portal, email, or SMS. Official s 
communicate with users to provide updates, seek additional information if required, and inform them of the resolution outcome . 
 
Basic Categorization of Grievances  

 
47 
 Category  Sub Category  Conflict Classification  Level 1  Level 2  
Policy  - Subsidy eligibility  
o Category of consumer  
o Size of system  
o Date of application/installation  
o Occupation/ownership of premises  
o Placement of RTS system (in spaces except 
rooftop)  
- State subsidy details  
- Net metering / Gross metering policies  Consumer – Central Govt.  MNRE  MNRE  
Registration 
and Login (IT 
issue)  - Unable to Register  
- Consumer Not Found  
- Portal freezing/unresponsive  
- Captcha Issue  
- OTP not received  
- Website slow to load  
- Consumer already registered  Consumer – Central Govt.  NIC MNRE  

 
48 
 Application 
Process (IT 
issue)  - Consumer details not fetched/incomplete  
- Unable to upload electricity bill  
- Unable to find Division  
- Unable to find Sub -division  
- Application not passed on to Discom  
- Application errors by consumer  
o Correction/editing requests  
o Application deletion requests  
- Change of ownership/electricity connection 
details  Consumer – Central Govt.  NIC MNRE  
Discom Issues  - Delay in feasibility  
- Delay in net metering  
- Delay in commissioning  
- Incorrect metering and billing  Consumer - DISCOM  Discom  REC/MNRE  
(Detailed 
redressal 
mechanism to 
be discussed 
and finalized)  
Subsidy Related  - Delays in disbursement  
- Incorrect subsidy amount  
- Bank details submission  Consumer – Central Govt.  REC REC/MNRE  

 
49 
 Vendor Related  - Unable to find a vendor  
- Vendor not responding  
- Delay in installation  
- Maintenance not provided  
- Quality issue  
- System performance issue  
- Asking for extra charges  
- Fraudulent practice  
- System not eligible for subsidy (Domestic Content 
Requirement not followed)  Consumer - Vendor  Discom  REC/MNRE  
(Detailed 
redressal 
mechanism to 
be discussed 
and finalized)  
Customer 
Service, 
Communication 
and Social 
Media  - Responsiveness of Call centre  
- Grievance Management System  
- No response from nodal official  
- Delay in addressing queries and complaints  
- Grievances posted on Social Media platforms  Consumer – Central Govt.  MNRE  MNRE  
 
 
 

 
50 
 Annexure X  Draft MoU between MNRE and the State/UTs  
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) Between: The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE), Government of India and  _____( Name of the State /UT)  
 
Preamble:  
This Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is entered into on this [DD/MM/YYYY], between 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, and the State/UT 
Government of _____  
Recitals:  
WHEREAS, MNRE is entrusted with the responsibility of promoting and developing renewable 
energy sources, including solar energy, in India.  
AND WHEREAS, MNRE is implementing PM - Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana (hereinafter referred 
to as “The Scheme”).  
AND WHEREAS, REC Limited has been designated as the overall National Programme  
Implementing Agency (NPIA) for the PM  - Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana.  
AND WHEREAS, the Government of (State/UT name) and their agencies/departments, 
especially electricity distribution companies (Discoms) & State Nodal Agency (SNA) for 
renewable energy, have a crucial role in the successful implementation of the PM -Surya Gh ar: 
Muft Bijli Yojana at ground  level . 
AND WHEREAS, both MNRE and the Government of (State/UT name) recognize the need to 
collaborate to accelerate the deployment of grid -connected rooftop solar under this scheme.  
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises and covenants contained herein, 
both parties agree as follows:  
Objectives:  

 
51 
 To promote the installation of grid -connected rooftop solar systems in the residential sector 
within the geographical jurisdiction of State, and to that conduct public awareness, outreach 
activities, and capacity -building initiatives to promote their adopt ion; 
To set ambitious rooftop solar targets for the Government, commercial, and industrial (C&I), as 
well as residential sectors and establish robust high -level monitoring mechanisms for 
overseeing the progress of the implementation of this scheme.  
To strengthen Discoms for rooftop solar implementation by identifying dedicated manpower 
for this programme , undertake efforts to enhance the rooftop solar vendor base in respective 
states/UTs and create a positive regulatory environment for grid -connected rooftop solar 
power into the electricity grid, ensuring the efficient and sustainable use of solar energy  
Responsibilities of MNRE : 
Policy & Regulations Support: MNRE will provide guidance/inputs/recommendations to update 
existing policy and regulations to DISCOM/SNA/Designated State Department/Agency  
Technical Assistance: MNRE will collaborate with DISCOM/SNA/designated state department 
for technical standards and guidelines assistance for grid -connected rooftop solar installations.  
Financial Support: MNRE shall provide financial support in line with the guidelines of the PM -
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana.  
National Portal: MNRE shall be responsible for the Development and management of the 
National Portal.  
Responsibilities of State / UT Government  
The State Government agrees to implement the Scheme and to that end shall ensure  
1) Adherence to Scheme Guidelines: The State /UT Government shall ensure adherence to 
the scheme guidelines in their entirety including the use of the scheme name  

 
52 
 2) Regulations:  The State /UT Government shall ensure that the processes, State/UT level 
Standard Operating Procedures and regulatory provisions are at least in alignment with the 
provisions of Electricity (Right of Consumers) Rule 2020 and its amendments thereof and in 
alignment with the guidelines of the Scheme.  
3) Service Time Lines: The State/UT government shall ensure that time -bound services are 
provided to consumers for RTS for critical services such as technical feasibility, inspection, 
commissioning, net meter supply and signing of Net Metering agreements.  
4) IEC Activities: The State /UT Government shall undertake public awareness campaigns as 
per the IEC plan of the Scheme and shall ensure adherence to Scheme IEC guidelines.  
5) Additional Subsidy: The State /UT Government may provide additional subsidy on top of 
the Central financial assistance , however this will be subject to adherence to all scheme 
guidelines and routing of additional subsidy through the National Portal. A ny alteration to the 
Scheme framework must be duly approved by the Scheme Mission Directorate.  
6) Coordination: The State /UT shall coordinate with National Programme  Implementations 
Agency for the successful implementation of the PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana.  
7) Monitoring of the Scheme: The State /UT Government shall constitute a State Level 
Steering Committee headed by the Chief Secretary of the State/UT and District Level 
Committee s for the monitoring of the scheme.  
8) IT Integration: The State /UT Government shall coordinate in the integration of the State 
Portal API with the National Portal for sharing of relevant data relating to rooftop solar 
installations.  
9) Vendor Registration: The State /UT DISCOM shall may register the vendors operating 
within their respective State. The vendor is here by permitted to get registered to any DISCOM 
of the State /UT, in case of multiple DISCOMs operating in that State /UT and that no DISCOM 
shall refuse to cater their demand for registration.  

 
53 
 10) Declaration of Target: The State /UT Governments may declare short medium and long 
term targets for rooftop solar systems across all sectors.  
11) Formation of RTS cell: The State /UT Government shall create a dedicated RTS cell for the 
purpose of monitoring and coordination with the NPIA and Ministry.  
Cooperation:  
MNRE and States will collaborate on projects, research, and initiatives aimed at improving the 
distribution sector and accelerating the deployment of grid -connected rooftop solar systems.  
Both parties will engage in regular meetings, discussions, and information sharing to ensure the 
effective implementation of this MoU.  
Funding:  
Funding for grid -connected rooftop solar projects and initiatives under this MoU will be 
determined through separate agreements or funding mechanisms as mutually agreed upon by 
MNRE and S tate. 
Duration:  
This MoU shall come into effect on the date of signing and shall remain in force for a period of 
[Specify Term], unless terminated by mutual consent.  
Amendment:  
Any amendment or modification to this MoU shall be made in writing and will require the 
consent of both parties.  
 