Renewable Energy Data Portal
India has set itself an ambitious renewable energy target of 175 GW by 2022. In spite of the several benefits of renewable energy, such a high target has profound implications for the Indian power sector, especially in the medium term. Hence it is very important for the electricity sector actors to objectively look at the growth of renewables. A lot of data is already available to understand the renewable energy sector, but more granular and comprehensive up-to-date data, publicly accessible in a user friendly manner, can aid better understanding of the renewable energy evolution in the country.
This Renewable Energy Data Portal is Prayas (Energy Group)'s effort to collate important data which is already available in the public domain and organise it in a manner which makes it more amenable for easier public access. Another feature of this effort is the interactive nature of the data portal which allows users to personalize their interaction and compare data across their chosen years/states/segments etc.
The Indian renewable energy sector has been in an extremely dynamic phase of evolution in the last few years, especially with regard to capacity addition and prices. India has set itself an ambitious renewable energy target of 175 GW by 2022. In spite of the several social, economic and environmental benefits of renewable energy, such a high target has profound implications and can throw up myriad challenges for the Indian power sector, especially in the medium term. Hence it is very important for the electricity sector actors to objectively look at the growth of renewables. A lot of data is already available to understand the renewable energy sector, but more granular and comprehensive up-to-date data, publicly accessible in a user friendly manner, can aid better understanding of the renewable energy evolution in the country.
ThisRenewable Energy Data Portalis Prayas (Energy Group)'s effort to collate important data, already available in the public domain, at one place and present it so as to underline the rapidly growing renewable energy. Another feature of this effort is the interactive nature of the data portal which allows users to look at specific information, across renewable energy sources/years/states etc. The resulting graphs can then be downloaded using the "Download" button at the bottom.The portal was inaugurated by Mr. Anil Jain, Adviser (Energy), Niti Aayog on 1st December, 2016. The first revision took place in November 2017. A second revision took place in June 2018 to include more data and improved visualization. A new tab has added on rooftop solar, mostly containing data on prices discovered through bidding. Along with it, the RE capacity, RE prices, and renewable energy certificates were expanded to include more data. A third revision took place in July 2019. In this update, two new visualizations have been added, in the REC and RPO tabs.
Please use the following citation for the portal: Prayas (Energy Group), Renewable Energy Data Portal (https://www.prayaspune.org/renewable-energy-data-portal)
Note:Though Prayas (Energy Group) has taken several measures to ensure correctness of the data shown in the portal, we do not make any implicit or explicit claims about the accuracy of the same. We hope to improve this portal over time by periodically updating it when data becomes available in the public domain. We welcome contribution from all stakeholders to address any errors/data gaps as well as pointers to any new data which can be hosted on this portal.
Contact:This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.
Last update made in February 2021
Please complete all required fields!
Keep up with the latest news and events, Subscribe to our newsletter