Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission  
   Vidyut Viniyamak Bhawan, Near State Motor Garage,Sahakar Marg, Jaipur -302001  
           Phone: 0141 -2741299, 2740067, Fax: 0141 -2741018, E -mail: rercjpr@yahoo.co.in  
                                               website: www.rerc.rajasthan.gov.in  
 
PUBLIC NOTICE  
 
In exercise of powers conferred under Section  86(1)(e) read with Section 181 
of the Electricity Act, 2003, and all other p owers  enabling it in this behalf, th e 
Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission ha ving framed the following 
Draft Regulations, invites suggestions/comments from the interested persons 
before finalizing them . 
 
‘RERC (Terms and Conditions for Green Energy Open Access) 
Regulations, 2024 ’ 
 
Notice is hereby issued inviting comments/suggestions on the above Draft 
Regulations from interested persons. The copy of the Draft Regulations may 
be obtained from the Receiving Officer of the Commission on payment of 
Rs. 100/ -. The Draft Regulations are also available on Commission’s website 
www.rerc.rajasthan.gov.in .   
 
The comments/suggestions if any should reach the Receiving Officer of 
the Commission  in six copies on or before  18.10.2024 . 
 
                                                                                                         
 
                                                                                                                  Secretary  
 
(Not to be published)  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                  (B.L.Goyal)  
                                                                                                                        IAS 
                                                                                                                 Secretary  
 
 

   jktLFkku fo|qr fofu;ked vk;ksx  
        fo|qr fofu;ked Hkou] LVsV eksVj xsjst ds ikl] lgdkj ekxZ]t;iqj&302001  
          nqjHkk"k % bZ -ih-ch-,Dl 0141&2741299] QSDl %0141&2741018  
        bZ&esy :  rercjpr@yahoo.co.in  Website : www.rerc.rajasthan.gov.in  
 
 
lkoZtfud lwpuk  
 
fo|qr vf/kfu;e] 2003  dh /kkjk 86 ¼1½¼bZ½  lgifBr /kkjk 181 ,oa vU; lHkh izko/kku tks 
bl lanHkZ esa bls lkeF;Z iznku djrs gS a] ds varxZr jktLFkku fo|qr fofu;ked vk;ksx }kjk 
izk:i  fofu;e cuk;s x;s gSA budks vafre :i nsus ls iwoZ vk;ksx }kjk lHkh bPNqd 
O;fDr;ksa ls lq>ko@fVIif.k;ka vkeaf=r dh tkrh gS a% 
jktLFkku fo|qr fofu;ked vk;ksx ¼ gfjr ÅtkZ [kqyh igqap  gsrq fucU èku ,oa 'krs±  ½  
fofu;e] 2 024- 
,rn~}kjk mijksDr of.kZr izk:i fofu;eks  dh lwpuk tkjh dj bPNqd O;fDRk;ksa ls 
lq>ko@fVIif.k;k¡ vkefU=r fd;s tkrs gaS -SA izk:Ik fofu;e e; leFkZu fooj.k dh izfrfyih 
vk;ksx ds izkIrdrkZ vf/kdkjh ds ikl miyC/k gS ftls : 100 dk udn Hkqxrku dj izkIr 
fd;k tk ldr k gSSA izLrkfor fofu;e e; leZFkd fooj.k vk;ksx dh oSclkbZV 
www.rerc.rajasthan.gov.in  ij Hkh miyC/k gSaA   
 ;fn dksbZ O;fDr lq>ko@fVIif.k;k¡  nsuk pkgs rks vk;ksx ds izkIrdrkZ vf/kdkjh dks 
fnukad 18-10-2024 rd ;k blls iwoZ N% izfr;ks esa izkIr gks tkuh pkfg, A 
       
  
      lfpo 
______________________________________________________________________________________   
(Not to be published)  
 
 
  ¼ch-,y-xks;y½ 
    vkbZ,,l  
    lfpo 
 
 

1 
 (Draft Regulation)  
Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission  
“Rajasthan  Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions for Green  
Energy Open  Access) Regulations, 202 4” 
 
NOTIFICATION NO. ______ OF 2024  
 
 In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 181 of the Electricity Act, 
2003 (36 of 2003), read with Sections 39, 40, 42, 61 and 86 thereof and all other 
powers enabling it in this behalf, and after previous publicat ion, the Rajasthan  
Electricity Regulatory Commission hereby makes the following R egulations, 
namely Draft Rajasthan  Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions 
for Green Energy Open Access) Regulations, 202 4. 
 
1. Short Title , Commencement  and Extent of Application : 
 
i. These Regulations shall be called the Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (Terms and Conditions for Green Energy Open Access) 
Regulations, 202 4. 
 
ii. These Regulations shall come into force from such date  as the Commission 
may notify.  
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for commencement of 
provision s of different regulations.  
 
iii. These Regulations shall extend to the whole State of Rajasthan.  
 

2 
 iv. Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other Regulation  time 
being in force , of the Commission, t hese Regulations shall be applicable for 
allowing Open Access to electricity generated from Renewable Energy 
Sources , both captive and third party , for use of Intra -State Transmission 
System/s (InSTS) and/or distri bution system/s of licensee/s in the State, including 
such Intra -State Transmission and/or distribution system/s, which are incidental 
to Inter -State Transmission of electricity.  
 
2. Definitions : 
(i) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires  , 
 
a. “Act" means the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003) ; 
b. “Applicant” means a consumer, trading licensee, distribution licensee or a 
Generating company who has applied seeking Green Energy Open 
Access as the case may be;  
c. “Banking” means the surplus green energy injected in the grid and 
credited with the distribution licensee by the Green Energy Open Access 
consumers and that shall be drawn along with charges to compensate 
additional costs; if any;  
d. "Central Nodal Agency”  means the Nodal Agency as notified by the 
Central Government to set up and operate a single window green energy 
open access system  for renewable energy as per the Rules;  
e.  "Commission" means the Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission.  
f. “Entity” means any consumer who has contracted demand or san ctioned 
load of one hundred kW or more either through single connection or 
through multiple connections aggregating one hundred kW or more 
located in the same electricity division of a distribution licensee, except 
for captive consumers. However, in case of captiv e consumers, there shall 
not be any load limitation.  

3 
 g. "Existing Consumer" means a person already availing open access for 
sourcing/supplying  Renewable  energy to the transmission system and/or 
distribution system of a licensee  in state  under an existing agre ement or 
GoR  policy on the date of coming into force of these Regulations.  
h. "Forum of Regulators" means the Forum as referred to in sub -section (2) of 
section 166 of the Act.  
i. “Green Energy/Renewable Energy” means the electrical energy from 
renewable sources  of energy including hydro, pumped Storages Hydro 
generation, energy storage system and storage (if the storage uses only 
renewable energy), Municipal Solid Waste -to-Energy based generation, 
biomass and bagasse based co -generation plants or any other 
techn ology as may be notified by the GOI from time to time and shall also 
include any mechanism that utilizes renewable energy to replace fossil 
fuels including production of green hydrogen or green ammonia;  
j. “Green Energy Open Access Consumer”  means any person who has 
contract demand or sanctioned load of 100 kW or more, either through 
single connection or through multiple connections aggregating one 
hundred (100) kW or more located in same electricity division of a 
distribution licensee, shall be e ligible to take Green Energy through Open 
Access (captive consumers shall not have any load limit) or such other 
limit as may be specified by Commission from time to time, who are 
supplied with electricity from green energy sources for their own use by a 
licensee or the Government or from its own Captive Generation Plant or 
by any other person engaged in the business of supplying electricity to 
the public including captive under the Electricity Act, 2003 or any other 
law for the time being in force and incl udes any person whose premises 
are for the time being connected for the purpose of receiving green 
energy with the works of a licensee, the Government or such person, as 

4 
 the case may be. There shall be no limit of supply of power for the captive 
consumers taking power under Green Energy Open Access:  
k. “Obligated Entity” means the entities mandated under Clause (e) of 
subsection (1) of Section 86 of the Act to fulfill the Renewable Purchase 
Obligation, which includes distribution licensee, captive consumer / u ser 
and open access consumer;  
l. "Open Access" means the non -discriminatory provision for the use of 
transmission lines or distribution system or associated facilities with such 
lines or system by any licensee or consumer or a person engaged in 
generation in accordance with the Regulations specified by  the 
Appropriate Commission.  
m.  "Person" shall include any company or body corporate or association or 
body of individuals whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical 
person;  
n. “Rules” means Rules made under  the Electricity Act 2003 including 
Electricity (Promoting Renewable Energy Through Green Energy Open 
Access)Rules, 2022 and subsequent Amendments.  
o. "SLDC" means the State Load Dispatch Centre established under sub -
section (1) of section 31 of the Act.  
p. "State Transmission Utility ” means the Board or the Government  company 
specified as such by the State Government under sub -section (1) of 
section 39 of the Act;  
q. “Standby charges” means the charges applicable to green energy open 
access consumers against the standby arrangement provided by the 
distribution licensee, in case such green energy open access consumer is 
unable to procure/schedule power from the generating sources with 
whom they have the agreements to procure power due to outages of 
generator, trans mission systems and the like;  

5 
 r. "Wheeling" means the operation whereby the distribution system and 
associated facilities of a transmission licensee or distribution licensee, as 
the case may be, are used by another person for the conveyance of 
electricity on payment of charges to be determined under section 52 of 
the Act;  
 
(ii) Words and expressions used and not defined in these regulations but 
defined in the Act or the Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC ) or the Rules 
prescribed by GOI or the State Grid Code or the State Electricity Supply 
Code shall have the meaning assigned to them under the Act or the IEGC  
or the Rules  or the State Grid Code, or the State Electricity Supply Code or 
any other Regulations notified by the Commission as the case may be.  
 
3. Criteria for allowing Green Energy Open Acc ess ( GEOA ) 
i.  The long -term GEOA shall be allowed in accordance with the 
transmission planning criteria and other relevant provisions stipulated in 
the State Gri d Code and distribution plan  as prepared  by the Distribution 
Licensee.  
 
ii. The Short -Term/Medium Term open access shall be allowed, if the request 
can be accommodated, by utilizing : 
a. Inherent design margins  
b. Margins available due to variation in power flows and  
c. Margins available due to in -built spare transmission system ca pacity 
and/or distribution system capacity created to cater to future load 
growth;  
 
Provided that any consumer  may elect to purchase  green energy either  
up to a certain percentage of the consumption or its entire consumption 

6 
 and they may place a requisitio n for this with their distribution licensee, 
which shall procure such quantity of green  energy and supply it and the 
consumer shall have the flexibility to give separate req uisition for solar and 
non-solar  Green Energy. 
 
Provided also that a ny requisition for green ene rgy from a distribution 
licensee shall be f or a minimum period of one year.  
 
Provided also that t he quantum of green energy shall be pre -specified for 
at least one year.  
 
Provided also that t he green energy purchased from distribution licensee 
or from Renewable Energy sources other than distribution licensee in 
excess of Renewable Purchase Obligation of obligated entity shall be 
counted towards Renewable Purchase Obligation compliance of the 
distribution licensee.  
 
Provided also that t he Accounting of r enewable energy supplied at 
distribution licensee le vel shall be on a monthly basis.  
 
4. Categorization of Green Energy Open Access:  
The Green Energy Open Access consumers shall be classified into the following 
categories based on the duration of use of the i ntra- state transmission and/or 
distribution system:  
i.  “Long -term Green Energy Open Access” means the right to use the intra -
State transmission system and/or distribution system for a period 
exceeding 12 years but not exceeding 25 years.  

7 
 ii. “Medium -term Green Energy Open Access” m eans the right to use the 
intra -State transmission system and/or distribution system for a period 
exceeding three months but not exceeding three years.  
iii. “Short -term Green Energy Open Access” means open access for a period 
up to one month at a time.  
 
Provided that on expiry of granted short term Green Open Ac cess, if such 
consumer desires to avail the short -term Green Energy Open Access for further 
period , it shall require to file application for such period and such application 
shall be considered as fresh application and priority shall be fixed on basis of 
date of such application.  
 
5. Eligibility Criteria for applying GEOA  
i. Subject to the provisions of these  Regulations and system availability, 
consumers shall be eligible for open access to the intra -state transmission 
system of the State Transmission utility or any transmission licensee/s and 
distribution system/s of the distribution Licensee/s within the St ate. 
 
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations, 
any RE generating company having subsisting Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) with the Distribution Licensee, shall not be entitled to 
Open Access for the RE capacity, for whi ch PPA is entered into, except i n 
accordance with the terms of such PPA and also for such capacity 
(quantum of power) for which Open Access is already granted.  
 
Provided further that, such open access shall be available on payment of 
such charges as may be deter mined by the Commission from time to 
time.  

8 
 Provi ded also that such entities having  been declared insolvent  or 
bankrupt or having outstanding dues against them for more than 2 
months of billing of the distribution/ Transmission licensee or having a case 
of unauthorized use of electricity / theft against them at the time of 
application, shall not be eligible for Open Access.  
 
ii. Every person, who has constructed a captive generating plant,  shall have 
the right to open access as per the pro visions of Section 9 of the Act read 
with rules & Regulations covered under the Act and orders of the 
Commission on the subject matters from time to time.  
 
Provided that cons umers who have contract demand or sanctioned load of 100 
kW or more, either through single connection or t hrough multiple connections 
aggregating Hundred (100) kW or more located in same electricity division of a 
distribution licensee, shall be eligible to take Green Energy thro ugh Open 
Access under these Regulations.  
 
Provided further that there shall be no limit with respect to contracted load or 
sanctioned load for the captive use of energy by the consumer opting under 
Green Energy Open Access. However, this shall be on payment of charges and 
on such terms & condition s as may be decided by the Commission.   
 
6. Nodal Agency  
i. All the applications related to green energy open access shall be submitted  
through the portal set up by the Central Nodal Agency. The applications shall 
be routed to the State Nodal Agency (SNA) by the  Central Nodal Agency.  
 
Provided that the application received through Central Nodal Agency by SNA 
shall be processed as per p rocedure & formats devised  by SNA.  

9 
  
Provided also that the application shall be disposed within 15 days from the 
date of receiving  the same from CNA . 
 
ii. Rajasthan  State Transmission Utility  (STU)  shall operate as the State Nodal 
Agency ( SNA) for grant of long -term and medium -term  green energy open 
access and Rajasthan State Load Despatch  Centre (SLDC) shall operate as 
the State Nodal Agency (SNA) for grant of  short -term green energy open 
access.  
iii. The STU  shall submit detailed procedures covering , but not limited to, timelines, 
Bank Guarantee , fees, Rejection , Energy Accounting and Settlement and 
other matters incidental thereto , required for smooth operation  of Green 
Energy Open Access , for the approval of the Commission [along with required 
formats for granting GEOA  within 30 days from the  notification of these 
Regulations.  
 
iv. The SNA shall coordinate with transmission licensees Including STU and the 
Distribution Licensees to make available all relevant information regarding 
green energy open access to the public on the portal of the Central Nodal 
Agency.  
 
7. Treatment for existing Consumers : 
The existing consumer(s)/generators may continue to avail the RE under open 
access as per the existing agreements or government policy for the period 
specified in those agreements or policies.  
 
Provided that the existing consumers/generators shall continue to pay the 
applicable charges as specified in the ir respective agreements or as may be 
determined by the Commission from time to time.  

10 
  
Provided further that Green Energy O pen Access for the subsequent period in 
respect of such consumer (s)/generator (s) shall be governed by provisions of 
these Regulations.  
 
Provided also that if Open Access for any additional RE capacity is sought by 
such existing consumer(s)/generator (s) in addition to the capacity alread y 
contracted unde r open access, the same shall be treated as new application 
for Green Energy O pen Access to the extent of additional capacity sought.  
 
8. Allotment priority  
i. Distribution Licensees shall have highest priority.  
ii. GEOA consumers shall have preference over  normal Open Access 
consumers.  
iii. Among the GEOA consumers, long -term GEOA consumers shall have 
preference followed by Medium term and subsequently short -term, at any 
given time, subject to availability of spare transmission/distribution system 
capacity margi ns. 
 
Provided that, the decision for allowing the green energy open access shall be 
on the basis of first come first served.  
 
 
9.  Non-Utilization  of open access service by Open Access Consumers  
i. In the event of inability of the short -term open access consumer to utilize 
for more than four hours, full or substantial part of the capacity allocated 
to him, such a short -term open access consumer shall inform the 
respective SLDC of his inability to uti lise the capacity, along with reasons 
therefore and may surrender the use of capacity allocated to him. 

11 
 However, such short -term consumer shall bear full transmission and /or 
wheeling charges based on the original reserved capacity and the period 
for which  such capacity was reserved.  
 
ii. A medium -term/long -term consumer shall not relinquish or transfer his 
rights and obligations specified in the open access agreement without 
prior approval of the state nodal agency. The relinquishment or transfer of 
such rights and obligations by a long -term /medium term  consumer shall 
be subject to payment of compensation, as provided in the procedure to 
be approved by the Commission.  
 
iii. The State Nodal Agency  may cancel or reduce the capacity allocated to 
a short -term open access consumer to the extent it is underutilized, when 
such a short -term open access consumer under -utilizes the allocated 
capacity more than 2 times in a month with duration of under  utilization 
exceeding 2 hours each time or fails to inform the distribut ion licensee of 
his inability to utilize  the allocated capacity. Such cancellation shall be 
resorted to after giving due notice . 
 
iv. The surplus capacity available as a result of its surrender by the short -term 
open  access consumer under clause (i ) above or r eduction or 
cancellation of capacity by the SLDC unde r clause (iii ) above, may be 
allocated to any other short -term open access consumer in the order of 
pending applications based on the point of injection and drawl . 
 
10. Energy Accounting  : 
i. Inter -state transa ctions : 
In case of Green Energy Open Access carried out under inter -state 
transaction , energy accounting shall be as per the CERC Regulations.  

12 
  
Notwithstanding anything contrary  contained in any other Regulation s 
time being in force,  if the generator situated in the State of Rajasthan  and 
connected with the State grid and selling power outside the State the 
energy accounting for deviation settlement be carried out , wherein the 
deviation charge shall be either (A) Reference Charge Rate or (B) Normal 
Rate of Charges for deviation, whichever is higher.  
 
Explanation: Reference Charge Rate and Normal Rate of Charges for 
deviation shall have the meaning as defined in CERC DSM Regulations 
from time to time.  
 
ii. Intra -state transactions :  
Long Term Access/Medium -Term Open Access/Short -Term Open Access:  
 
The deviation charges shall be payable by the generator as per the RERC 
(Forecasting and Scheduling and Related Matters for Solar and Wind 
Generation Sources) Regulations, 2017  as amended from time to time .  
 
Provided that the Green Energy Generator (RE generator) other than 
solar, wind and Wind -Solar Hybrid generator which were commissioned 
under the respective RE tariff orders passed by the Commission from time 
to time and in operation shall be governed by the provisions of relevant 
orders of the Commission.  
 
Provided further that mechanism for energy settlement may be provided 
in the procedure to be approved by the Commission.   
 
11. Charges for Green Energy Open Access : 

13 
 The cha rges payable by the Green Energy Open Access consumers shall be as 
follows: - 
i. Transmission Charges  
ii. Wheeling Charges  
iii. Cross subsidy charges  
iv. Additional surcharge  
v. Banking Charges  
vi. Stand by charges, wherever applicable  
vii. Reactive Energy Charges.  
viii. Other fees and charges such as SLDC fees and scheduling charges, 
deviation   settlement (DSM) charges as per the relevant Regulations or  
orders of the Commission.  
ix. Any other charges as may be decided by the Commission from time to 
time  
 
11.1 Transmission Charge s  
Green Energy Open Access Consumer using transmission system shall pay 
the charges as stated hereunder:  
 
11.1.1    For use of inter -State transmission system:  
       As specified by the Central Commission from time to time.  
 
11.1.2   For use of intra -State transmission system:  
The determination of Transmission Charges for Long -Term, Medium -
Term and Short -Term open access shall be determined by the 
Commission as per th e prevailing provisions of the R ERC Tariff  
Regulations from time to  time. The applicable rate of Transmission 
Charge payable by Green Energy Open Access Consumer shall be 
specified by the Commission in its Tariff Order . 

14 
  
11.2 Wheeling Charges  
Wheeling charges payable to distribution licensee, by the Green 
Energy Open Access Consumer for usage of its system shall be as 
determined by the Commission in the  tariff order from time to time 
subject to provisions of RERC ( Terms and Conditions for Tariff 
determination from Renewable Energy Sources) Regulations , 2020 as 
amended from time to time.  
 
11.3 Cross Subsidy Surcharge  
a. The Green Energy Open Access facility availed by a consumer shall be 
required to pay cross subsidy surcharge as provided in relevant Tariff 
Order issued by the Commission from time to time, in a ddition to 
transmission and/or wheeling charges. Cross subsidy surcharge 
determined by the Commission on Per Unit basis shall be payable, on 
billing cycle basis, by the open access customers based on the actual 
energy consumed during the billing period thr ough open access. The 
amount of surcharge shall be paid to the distribution licensee in whose 
area of supply such consumer is situated.  
 
Provided that such cross -subsidy surcharge shall not  be levied in case 
green energy open access is provided to a person  who has 
established a captive generation plant for carrying the electricity to 
the destination of his own use.  
 
Provided further that the Commission may not increase cross -subsidy 
surcharge for Green Energy Open Access Consumer purchasing green 
energy, f rom a generating plant using green ene rgy (renewable 
energy) sources,  during twelve years from the date of operating of the 